---
title:
    Conclusion
---

Lots of things happened and I haven't managed to finish writing all of the
travel reports yet, but considering it's already January and I'm back home for
almost a month already, I feel like it's time to take a step back to look at
all the things that happened and the way these things reshaped my way of
thinking. I'll also record some interesting stories here.

## Leaving your home and beginning a new life

This was by far the most humbling experience. I live in the German countryside
which means my connection to the people and environment around me is strong. I
didn't feel that way at first because I don't talk that much with people from
around my neighborhood, but as I left the town I call home for more than 22
years now, I started to notice things being absent I didn't think about before.

I wouldn't call this homesickness *per se*, although it was still an uncanny
feeling I haven't experienced before. Although I was busy for almost the
whole four months, the realization of not being home was a silent companion.

I'd call myself a curious person which likes to take challenge in adapting to a
new environment despite my reluctance to talk much. Without going too much into
psychology, I can safely say that being thrown into this new life didn't pose a
problem to me at all, this being not only due to the aforementioned mindset,
but also due to the similarity of life in Japan and back home. Shopping as well
as going out, attending classes and so on was in principle the same as back
home, and even though cultural differences made themselves obvious more often
than not, this didn't present itself as a problem.

Living abroad was the first time for me to live alone, but lots of chores I was
worried about, like cooking, washing and cleaning, only differed in quantity to
what I was used to back home. This practically means I had no concerns anymore
about moving and living alone without my family supporting me. Quite the
contrary, I've learned to appreciate the freedom of being able to do things in
your own way, and that's why I'm planning on moving out and changing university
in October 2023 for my graduate studies.

## Cultural and linguistic barriers

I went to Japan with moderate skills in reading and listening and almost no
speaking skills. This quickly remedied itself due to constant exposure and the
necessity to use the language in a variety of situation like talking with
friends or store clerks. Even though I managed to make myself understood in
some way or another, recording myself yielded the sobering realization that my
pronounciation is shit. Despite sounding like *gaijin*, being able to at least
convey information opened lots of doors for me and allowed me to make
experiences I wouldn't have been able to make otherwise. One example is the
four-day trip to [Tokyo](./2022_japan/tokyo.html).

I went together with a friend and our Japanese was good enough for simple
conversations, but not much more. One day, while wandering the streets of a
district near Akihabara, we decided to look for a small, family-owned
restaurant for some nice dinner. These kinds of businesses have a really good
atmosphere and I speak from experience when I say the food is just better.

After looking around for some time, we found a small Sushi shop which we promptly
entered. There was an old guy standing behind the counter talking with and
preparing sushi for another old customer while the wife of the old guy served
him some beer. As soon as we entered, they turned their eyes to us in surprise,
but still greeted us nicely, all in Japanese of course. Probably assuming we
didn't know any Japanese, the guy started preparing two plates of carefully
selected Sushi which totalled around 12 pieces per plate.

We ate Sushi before at chain restaurants like *Hamazushi*, but the high quality
stuff they made there (it was $35 btw, so it better be good) was on a whole
different level. Because the shop was almost empty at the time, I tried asking
the guy what a certain piece of Sushi was called because it was really
delicious, and he started talking about the art of Sushi making and how they
source their ingredients in more detail than I could ever have imagined. He
talked really quickly and I didn't understand everything, but being interested
in Sushi and possessing some level of Japanese proficiency resulted in the guy
talking like a waterfall and sharing lots of wonderful stories with us.

This is only one of many demonstrations of how basic Japanese skills make the
experience a thousand times better. Another interesting situation arose due to
us being foreign, so people automatically assume we speak English fluently
(which was the case of course).

The next day, we went to a small Izakaya which also offered great-looking food.
After ordering in Japanese and finishing half of our meal, some drunk
white-collar worker from the table next to us came over and told us he wanted
to practice his English, so he promptly began to tell his life story and asked
us where we came from etc. He then proceeded to talk about Japanese cuisine by
going over the restaurants menu and whenever we didn't know what something was,
he ordered it for us so we could try it. He probably spent over $50 that night
to introduce us to lots of nice stuff.

We also had quite some smalltalk with various people while [climbing
Sanageyama](./2022_japan/sanageyama.html) and even took part in a spontaneous
bottle flip competition with a group of Japanese students.

All these things require a certain amount of social initiative and openness of
course, but this usually presents no problem for most people going abroad, so
leaving aside more complicated things like going to the city hall to submit
some documents which can be a bit cumbersome, daily interactions with people
and finding friends stands in no contradiction to a lack in language ability,
although even a small amount of Japanese understanding helps a lot.

## Things that remain

The 24-hour journey back home was one of the weirdest experiences in my life.
Starting with packing all of my stuff and staring at the empty room I used to
call home for four months, all of the preparations felt kind of uncanny. Am I
really leaving all these people? Leaving this environment? It was almost as if
I had forgotten how life back home was and couldn't imagine a life outside my
small, 16sqm apartment. Going to the airport and boarding the plane felt like
just one of the many travel experiences I made during my stay.

Finally seeing Germany on the flight radar embedded in the seat in front of me
made me really excited for some reason. I have returned home and can finally
see family and friends, play table tennis and return to my old life, was my
thought at the time. I also wondered whether it'd take time to adjust to life
back home, but curiously, this wasn't the case. As soon as I left the plane and
heard people speaking German and took in the general atmosphere, it was the
same as the day I've left. It felt like I hadn't left the country at all and
all of the things I experienced were like a short daydream. The fact that my
life after coming back home **was** indeed the same (i.e. studying, playing
video games etc.) has probably played a big part in not needing to adjust
myself.

To this day, I wonder whether I've been away at all. It's so bad that only
checking LINE groups and chats I've had with people as well as travel photos
are able to convince me I've actually been to Japan. It's not like I forgot
anything - quite the contrary, I remember every trip and everyone I've
interacted with - but the *feeling* of having lived abroad for a while has
completely vanished from my mind. That's probably the meaning of the thing
everyone calls *home* so easily without thinking; a place you immediately feel
intimate with, even after a long time away.

Despite being back in my comfortable room, sleeping long hours and playing
video games all day long again, a few things stuck with me. Although my
personality didn't change much (it's probably too late for that already), I
managed to get some new perspective on things like friendship and camaraderie
fueled by us all being foreigners in a far away land. I still have many
contacts and plan on meeting some of the people in the near future. Travelling
the US, The Netherlands, Sweden, South Korea, China, Taiwan, France, Belgium,
Italy and of course Japan is way easier if you have friends living there you
can rely on.

Being part of a minority as a white dude was also a sobering experience. I
wouldn't say I was discriminated against, but knowing the feeling of being
different and people looking at you in a different way than others was quite
something.

Academically, I of course improved on my Japanese, especially the
speaking-with-confidence part. My grammar and vocabulary is still lacking and
my writing skills are close-to-zero, but I can manage on my own now and hold
conversations.

That's it. There's nothing more.
